NTSB Railroad Investigation Report RIR-25-19
New Jersey Transit Light Rail Vehicle Collision
Location: Florence, New Jersey. Date: October 14, 2024.
Source: https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/RIR2519.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-19

Accident type: Employee fatality. Train: Train 207, 2 articulated railcars, 1 operator, 41
passengers. Track: Federal Railroad Administration regulated track; Class 4 main, signalized.
Fatalities: 1. Injuries: 23 minor injuries. Property Damage: $194,000.

SUMMARY
On October 14, 2024, about 5:58 a.m., an Alstom employee operating southbound New Jersey
Transit (NJ Transit) train 207 was fatally injured when the train struck a tree that had fallen
across the tracks of the River Line at milepost (MP) 24.53 near Florence, New Jersey. Train 207
was a light rail vehicle consisting of two railcars with 41 passengers on board. During the
collision, a tree branch penetrated the lead railcar's forward windshield and struck the operator.
Twenty-three passengers were transported to a local hospital with minor injuries. Alstom
estimated damages to equipment to be about $194,000. At the time of the accident, visibility
conditions were dark with the train's headlights providing the only illumination, and the weather
was 60 degrees F with no precipitation.

A light rail vehicle is a railcar, locomotive, or other piece of rail equipment used in passenger
service but not built to the standards of equipment regulated by the Federal Railroad
Administration (FRA). This accident involved a multiagency regulatory environment: NJ Transit
falls under the Federal Transit Administration's purview but operates some of its trains over
FRA-regulated track. For these operations, NJ Transit is subject to FRA regulations but has
obtained waivers for compliance with some FRA requirements, including equipment standards.

ACCIDENT NARRATIVE
The operator reported for duty at 4:48 a.m. at an NJ Transit maintenance facility in Trenton, New
Jersey, and started her scheduled trip from Hamilton Avenue Station at 5:47 a.m. About 5:55
a.m., the train departed Bordertown Station, the last station north of the accident area. According
to event recorder data, the operator initiated an emergency braking application at 5:58:56 a.m.
while rounding a right-hand curve north of the point of impact. The train was traveling 65 mph
(the maximum authorized speed in the area) when braking began. The train came to a stop about
880 feet past the estimated point of impact.

The NTSB identified abrasive transfer marks on the rails consistent with emergency braking
starting about 340 feet from the point of impact (based on the head end of the train). During a
partial reenactment at low speed under predawn lighting conditions, the fallen tree became
visible to an approaching train operator about 350 feet north of the point of impact. Per FRA
waivers, the light rail vehicle's headlights were designed to illuminate a person standing 500 feet
away. Daylight observations found that the point of impact was visible from about 1,400 feet
away -- a 1,000-foot difference attributed to darkness and the limited reach of headlights at
night.

Braking tests performed by the vehicle's manufacturer in 2003 indicated this type of light rail
vehicle had an emergency braking distance of 499 feet from 60 mph under ideal conditions; the
manufacturer did not test braking performance above 60 mph.

The train operator was hired by Bombardier Transportation (acquired by Alstom in 2021) in
August 2004 and became an engineer in November 2004. Her engineer certification under 49
CFR Part 240 was current (last certification date October 19, 2022). In 2024, she passed all four
unannounced operational tests related to unexpected stops, including two "banner tests"
(simulated obstructions) and two "stop tests." Postmortem drug and alcohol testing did not find
impairing substances.

THE TREE
The tree involved was a chestnut oak with a 3-foot diameter trunk, growing on private property
about 40 feet east of the tracks and 11 feet past NJ Transit's property line. On-scene observations
did not find visible decay on the tree's exterior, but an arborist's postaccident examination of the
stump identified internal decay extending from the trunk into the root system. The arborist's
report did not include a reason why the tree fell when it did. Weather the night before was calm
(about 4 mph winds, no precipitation).

The Alstom maintenance-of-way superintendent described vegetation monitoring along the River
Line as including routine track and signal inspections twice per week, plus walking surveys
every spring and fall. Hazardous trees were marked with paint and recorded in supervisor logs,
but there were no fixed criteria for identifying hazardous trees. The last track inspection of the
accident area (October 11, 2024) found no defects related to trees. The last seasonal survey
(spring 2024) resulted in brush removal and tree trimming but no tree removals.

Review of Alstom records for the 18 months before the collision identified four cases of trains
striking downed trees and six cases of downed trees reported on or near tracks along the River
Line; two of the four strikes cracked windshields (January 9 and July 17, 2024), but none caused
injuries before this accident.

CORRECTIVE ACTION
NJ Transit and Alstom submitted a corrective action plan to the New Jersey Department of
Transportation (NJDOT, the state safety oversight agency) on November 4, 2024. Alstom
established a temporary 30-mph speed restriction near the accident area and contracted an
arborist for three assessment visits (October, November, December), surveying from MP 23.9 to
MP 27.4. After the assessment, Alstom had 111 trees removed. On February 27, 2025, Alstom
lifted the speed restriction, and NJDOT officially closed the corrective action plan on May 15,
2025. NJDOT added "Trees along the right-of-way" as a risk item to its quarterly inspection
schedule under its FTA-mandated risk-based inspection program (49 CFR Part 674, per the 2021
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, 49 U.S.C. 5329).

PROBABLE CAUSE
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of New Jersey
Transit train 207 striking a fallen tree, resulting in a tree branch piercing the front windshield and
fatally injuring the train operator, was the predawn low light conditions that prevented the
operator from seeing the tree in time to stop the train.

ANALYSIS
The investigation did not find evidence of defects with the train or track, and the operator was
not impaired. The operator applied the train's brakes less than 2 seconds after seeing the tree
(340 feet away at 65 mph, about 95 feet per second) -- a correct and timely response. However,
this distance was already within the train's minimum stopping distance (which would exceed the
499-foot braking distance measured at 60 mph), so the train retained enough speed at impact for
a tree branch to penetrate the windshield fatally. Investigators concluded it is unlikely that
Alstom's regular track inspections and seasonal surveys could have identified this particular tree
as a hazard, since it showed no visible external decay.

LESSONS LEARNED
The investigation identified four cases of trains striking downed trees before this accident.
These collisions were minor but indicated the presence of a risk that, on October 14, 2024, led to
a fatal collision. This accident underscores the importance of incorporating all measurable
hazards into system safety programs. Comprehensive safety oversight programs are required
under federal regulations at 49 CFR Part 674.
