NTSB/HAR-96/02
HIGHWAY/RAILROAD ACCIDENT REPORT
Collision of Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter Railroad Corporation (METRA) Train and
Transportation Joint Agreement School District 47/155 School Bus at Railroad/Highway Grade
Crossing in Fox River Grove, Illinois, on October 25, 1995
Source: https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/HAR9602.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-19

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On October 25, 1995, at 7:10 a.m., the Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter Railroad
Corporation (d/b/a Metropolitan Rail) express commuter train 624 struck the rear left side of a
stopped Transportation Joint Agreement School District 47/155 school bus at a railroad/highway
grade crossing in Fox River Grove, Illinois. The accident occurred after the school bus had
crossed the railroad tracks and stopped for a red traffic signal, with its rear extended about 3 feet
into the path of the train. Of the 35 school bus passengers, 7, 24, and 4 passengers sustained
fatal, serious to minor, and no injuries, respectively; the busdriver received minor injuries. The
120 passengers and 3 crewmembers aboard the commuter train were uninjured.

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the collision
was that the busdriver had positioned the school bus so it encroached upon the railroad tracks
because of the failure of: 1) the Illinois Department of Transportation to recognize the short
queuing area on northbound Algonquin Road and to take corrective action; 2) the Illinois
Department of Transportation to recognize the insufficient time of the green signal indication for
vehicles on northbound Algonquin Road before the arrival of a train at the crossing; and 3) the
Transportation Joint Agreement School District 47/155 to identify route hazards and to provide
its drivers with alternative instructions for such situations. Contributing to the accident was the
failure of the Illinois Department of Transportation and its many contractors, the Illinois
Commerce Commission, and the railroads to have a communication system that ensures
understanding of the integration and working relationship of the railroad and highway signal
systems.

The major safety issues discussed in this report are: the appropriateness of the busdriver's
performance; the adequacy of the school district bus routing and busdriver monitoring and
evaluating procedures; the road design; the railroad/highway signal interaction; the coordination
and communication between the Illinois Department of Transportation and the Union Pacific
Railroad Company and their oversight of the signal system integration; and the injury and
survival factors in the school bus.

INVESTIGATION
Accident Narrative
About 7:10 a.m. on October 25, 1995, an eastbound Northeast Illinois Regional Commuter
Railroad Corporation d/b/a Metropolitan Rail (METRA) express commuter train 624 en route to
Chicago, Illinois, collided with the left rear side of a Transportation Joint Agreement (TJA)
School District 47/155 school bus at a railroad/highway grade crossing in Fox River Grove,
Illinois. The collision occurred on Algonquin Road near its intersection with U.S. Route 14 (US
14). The school busdriver had driven across the railroad tracks and stopped for the red indication
of a highway traffic signal. The northbound school bus, which was waiting within the available
storage space (queuing area), had its left rear extending about 3 feet into the path of the train.

Of the 35 school bus passengers, 7 sustained fatal injuries, 24 sustained serious to minor injuries,
and 4 were not injured. The school busdriver sustained minor injuries. The estimated 120
passengers and the 3 crewmembers aboard the train were uninjured.

Table 1 -- Injuries
TYPE       Busdriver  Bus Passengers  Traincrew  Train Passengers  TOTAL
Fatal      0          7               0          0                 7
Serious    0          10              0          0                 10
Minor      1          14              0          0                 15
None       0          4               3          120                127
TOTAL      1          35              3          120                159

Railroad Signal System
The railroad grade crossing signal system uses a microprocessor to calculate the speed of the
train and the time it will take for the train to arrive at the crossing. The system activates the
crossing warning devices at a predetermined constant warning time regardless of the train's
speed. During the 5 years before the accident, the thumbwheel on the microprocessor at the
accident site had been set at 30 seconds for the northernmost railroad track. However, 2 weeks
before the accident (October 11, 1995), the thumbwheel was reset at 25 seconds. According to
the UP, the thumbwheel setting was changed to 25 seconds to ensure consistency at that crossing
and throughout the railroad's property.

FRA regulations address required minimum warning time in Title 49 CFR, Part 234.225,
"Activation of Warning System," which states: "A highway/rail grade crossing warning system
shall be maintained to activate in accordance with the design of the warning system, but in no
event shall it provide less than 20 seconds warning time before the grade crossing is occupied by
rail traffic."

Highway Signal System
At the accident crossing, once the microprocessor activates the crossing warning devices, the
highway signal system is simultaneously sent a signal via a "highway interconnect circuit."
Testimony from IDOT's contractors indicated that the preemption sequence could take as long as
21 seconds to reach a green indication for Algonquin Road under certain circumstances.

History of Algonquin Road
Before 1989, US 14 was a two-lane, two-way roadway. In 1989, IDOT widened US 14 using
about 35 feet of railroad property, thereby shortening the queuing area between the tracks and
US 14 from about 80 feet to about 45 feet. During the road-widening planning stages, the
railroad expressed safety concerns to IDOT and local communities about US 14 being less than
50 feet from its railroad tracks. However, IDOT completed the road-widening as planned.

Algonquin Road Grade Crossing Accident History
Safety Board investigators gathered accident information indicating that during February 1990
through September 1995, 20 accidents/incidents occurred at this crossing, resulting in no
fatalities or injuries. Nineteen accidents/incidents involved vehicles striking or being struck by
railroad gates; eleven involved commercial vehicles. In the month before the accident, on
September 18, 1995, a pickup truck driver drove northbound across the tracks after the crossing
warning devices had been activated; an eastbound train then struck the rear bumper of the pickup
truck.

Warning Time Tests
On October 25-26, 1995, Safety Board investigators timed approximately 15 trains to determine
the amount of time that passed between when the crossing warning devices were activated and
when the train arrived at the crossing. The shortest warning time was about 20 seconds and the
longest warning time was 155 seconds. In November 1995, IDOT independently conducted
postaccident testing and found that in 34 out of 66 tests, the traffic lights provided 10 seconds or
less for traffic on Algonquin Road to clear the railroad tracks.

Toxicological Tests
The ISP toxicological analysis indicates that the school busdriver's blood and urine, obtained 4
hours after the accident, were negative for alcohol. Toxicological tests of the engineer's blood
and urine samples were negative for alcohol and controlled substances.

PROBABLE CAUSE
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the collision
was that the busdriver had positioned the school bus so it encroached upon the railroad tracks
because of the failure of the Illinois Department of Transportation to recognize the short queuing
area and insufficient green signal time, and the failure of the Transportation Joint Agreement
School District 47/155 to identify route hazards and provide alternative driver instructions.
Contributing to the accident was the failure of IDOT, its contractors, the Illinois Commerce
Commission, and the railroads to have a communication system that ensures understanding of
the integration of the railroad and highway signal systems.

RECOMMENDATIONS
As a result of its investigation of this accident, the Safety Board made recommendations to the
Secretary of Transportation, the Federal Highway Administration, the Federal Railroad
Administration, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, the State of Illinois, the
Illinois Department of Transportation, the Transportation Joint Agreement School District
47/155, the National Association of State Directors of Pupil Transportation Services, the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the National Association
of County Engineers, the American Public Works Association, the Institute of Transportation
Engineers, the Association of American Railroads, the American Short Line Railroad
Association, the American Public Transit Association, and Operation Lifesaver, Inc.
