NTSB Railroad Investigation Report RIR-22/03
Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority Fatality at Spring Garden Station
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, July 28, 2021. Issued: February 25, 2022.
Source: https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports/RIR2203.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-19

THE ACCIDENT
On Wednesday, July 28, 2021, about 2:28 p.m. local time, a man was struck and killed by a train
at the Spring Garden Station platform in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. As the Southeastern
Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) Market-Frankford Line (MFL) passenger train
number 78 entered the station for a normal station stop, the man fell from the platform into the
path of the eastbound train and was struck and killed. Weather was mostly cloudy skies. SEPTA
is a regional public transportation authority operating bus, rapid transit, commuter rail, light rail,
and electric trolleybus services in and around Philadelphia. The Market-Frankford Line (MFL) is
a rapid transit line running from Upper Darby, Pennsylvania to the Frankford Transportation
Center (28 stations total). The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation State Safety Oversight have federal and state oversight
responsibility for SEPTA's MFL.

NTSB investigators reviewed onboard image recorders and station surveillance video. The
deceased had been standing on the platform for several minutes while trains boarded/offloaded
passengers, then began walking toward the platform edge exhibiting an unsteady gait. MFL train
78 entered the station simultaneously for a scheduled stop; the operator was using normal braking
and was looking forward and toward the man as he approached the platform edge. At the edge,
the man took an additional step that landed his foot halfway off the edge, causing him to lose his
balance and fall into the path of the train. The train struck him as he fell.

BEFORE THE ACCIDENT
The train operator arrived on duty about 12:04 p.m. at the 69th Street Transportation Center in
Upper Darby. Review of onboard image recorders showed the operator was attentive and
operating normally throughout.

The deceased had entered the MFL at Allegheny Station and ridden a train to Spring Garden
Station (six station stops away), where he spent about 8 minutes on the platform, about 5 of them
interacting closely with another person on a bench, during which he removed his right arm from
his sweatshirt while leaving his head and left arm in it. He then began to lean and rock back and
forth, walked away from the bench toward the platform, and appeared to lose muscular dexterity
and develop an unsteady gait.

POSTACCIDENT TESTING
Investigators found the platform area had tangent track, no physical obstructions, adequate sight
distance for approaching trains, dry/regular/even walking surfaces free of debris, and a properly
installed yellow tactile warning strip. Braking performance tests on the train met or exceeded
minimum criteria.

TRAIN OPERATOR
The 52-year-old operator was a qualified SEPTA Subway-Elevated Train Operator with 7 years
of MFL experience, recertified July 11, 2019, with no issues in his most recent performance
evaluation.

TOXICOLOGY
The train operator's postaccident toxicology testing (per 49 CFR Part 655, FTA regulations) was
negative for all tested substances, as was his preemployment testing. The City of Philadelphia's
Office of the Medical Examiner independently tested the deceased man's brain tissue (no
blood/serum was available) and identified: fluoxetine (prescription antidepressant, Prozac),
methamphetamine (a stimulant, without its usual metabolite amphetamine present), fentanyl (a
potent opioid) and its metabolite despropionylfentanyl, diazepam (Valium) and its metabolites
nordiazepam and oxazepam, xylazine (a veterinary tranquilizer and human drug of abuse), and a
hydroxyzine metabolite (desalkylhydroxyzine) without the parent sedating-antihistamine drug
itself.

AUTOPSY
Cause of death: blunt impact trauma. Manner of death: accident.

POSTACCIDENT ACTIONS
In September 2021, SEPTA announced it would spend $3.6 million on its "Safety, Cleaning,
Ownership, Partnership, and Engagement" (SCOPE) Program, increasing outreach workers from
7 to 57 to assist vulnerable populations (homelessness, addiction, mental illness) on the transit
system, creating a virtual patrol center to monitor 28,000 cameras, and equipping cleaning staff
with cell phones to streamline reporting unsafe conduct to police.

PROBABLE CAUSE
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the fatality was
the failure of the man on the station platform to maintain balance at the platform's edge, which
caused him to fall from the platform into the path of the train, where he was struck mid-fall by the
train and killed. Contributing to the cause of the accident was his impairment from a combination
of psychoactive drugs.
