NTSB/RAR-10/02
Collision of Two Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Metrorail Trains
Near Fort Totten Station, Washington, D.C., June 22, 2009
Source: https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/accidentreports/reports/rar1002.pdf
Accessed: 2026-09-19

ABSTRACT
On Monday, June 22, 2009, about 4:58 p.m., eastern daylight time, inbound Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Metrorail train 112 struck the rear of stopped inbound
Metrorail train 214. The accident occurred on aboveground track on the Metrorail Red Line near
the Fort Totten station in Washington, D.C. The lead car of train 112 struck the rear car of train
214, causing the rear car of train 214 to telescope into the lead car of train 112, resulting in a loss
of occupant survival space in the lead car of about 63 feet (about 84 percent of its total length).
Nine people aboard train 112, including the train operator, were killed. Emergency response
agencies reported transporting 52 people to local hospitals. Damage to train equipment was
estimated to be $12 million.

INVESTIGATION SYNOPSIS
The investigation found that the Metrorail automatic train control (ATC) system stopped
detecting the presence of train 214 (the struck train), which caused train 214 to stop and also
allowed speed commands to be transmitted to train 112 (the striking train) until the collision.
This loss of detection occurred because parasitic oscillation in the General Railway Signal
Company (GRS)/Alstom Signaling Inc. track circuit modules was creating a spurious signal that
mimicked a valid track circuit signal, thus causing the track circuit to fail to detect the presence
of train 214.

The investigation examined two near-collisions in 2005 near the Rosslyn Metrorail station that
were the result of a loss of train detection. In response to the Rosslyn event, WMATA developed
and issued technical bulletins requiring an enhanced circuit verification test procedure; however,
none of the WMATA technicians interviewed as part of this investigation was familiar with the
enhanced procedure.

PROBABLE CAUSE
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the June 22,
2009, collision of WMATA Metrorail train 112 with the rear of standing train 214 near the Fort
Totten station was (1) a failure of the track circuit modules, built by GRS/Alstom Signaling Inc.,
that caused the automatic train control system to lose detection of train 214 and thus transmit
speed commands to train 112 up to the point of impact, and (2) WMATA's failure to ensure that
the enhanced track circuit verification test (developed following the 2005 Rosslyn
near-collisions) was institutionalized and used systemwide.

Contributing to the accident were (1) WMATA's lack of a safety culture, (2) WMATA's failure to
effectively maintain and monitor the performance of its automatic train control system, (3)
GRS/Alstom Signaling Inc.'s failure to provide a maintenance plan to detect spurious signals, (4)
ineffective safety oversight by the WMATA Board of Directors, (5) the Tri-State Oversight
Committee's ineffective oversight and lack of safety oversight authority, and (6) the Federal
Transit Administration's lack of statutory authority to provide federal safety oversight.

Contributing to the severity of passenger injuries and the number of fatalities was WMATA's
failure to replace or retrofit the 1000-series railcars after these cars were shown in a previous
accident to exhibit poor crashworthiness.

ACCIDENT NARRATIVE
The operator of train 214 (the struck train) reported for duty at the Shady Grove station at 3:18
p.m. The operator of train 112 (the striking train) reported for duty at Brentwood Yard at 3:50
p.m. Train 214's operator said his train "lost speed commands" (readouts showed 0 mph)
between the Takoma and Fort Totten stations, causing it to stop. Train 112, operating in
automatic mode, was traveling behind train 214. According to recorded train control system
data, the speed commands transmitted to train 112 dropped from 55 mph to 0 mph at 4:56:41,
then resumed at 55 mph about 39 seconds later, at 4:57:20. Third-rail power was lost at 4:58:08
(the moment of collision). The point of collision was on track B2 about 2,935 feet north of the
Fort Totten station.

INJURIES AND DAMAGE
Eight passengers in the lead car of train 112 and the operator of train 112 were killed (nine total
fatalities). According to the fire department, 52 patients were transported to hospitals: 2 with
critical injuries, 12 with moderate injuries, and the rest with minor injuries. Damage to train
equipment was estimated at $12 million; about $5,000 in track and appurtenance damage also
occurred.

TRAIN AND MECHANICAL INFORMATION
All six cars of train 112 were 1000-series cars manufactured by Rohr; these were the oldest cars
in the Metrorail fleet. WMATA was in the process of purchasing new 7000-series cars
(tentatively scheduled starting in 2013) to replace the 1000-series cars. After the accident,
WMATA began "bellying" the 1000-series cars (placing them in the middle of trains) to reduce
their vulnerability to catastrophic damage, though no engineering analysis had validated this
approach before it was implemented.

AUTOMATIC TRAIN CONTROL SYSTEM
The Metrorail ATC system consists of three subsystems: Automatic Train Protection (ATP),
Automatic Train Supervision (ATS), and Automatic Train Operation (ATO). The ATP subsystem
maintains train separation by transmitting speed commands based on track occupancy detected
via track circuits. Track occupancy detection uses impedance bonds and audio-frequency
signals injected into the rails; when a train's wheelsets shunt this signal, the track relay
deenergizes, indicating "occupied."

The collision occurred within a 738-foot-long track circuit designated B2-304, located about 1/2
mile north of the Fort Totten station. Postaccident examination revealed that the track relay for
track circuit B2-304 was out of correspondence with the physical location of the accident trains:
the track relay was energized (indicating vacant) even though both accident trains were
occupying the block and shunting the track circuit. According to OCC records, track-circuit-
failed-occupied alarms (a different, more common malfunction) occur at a rate of about 5,000
per week systemwide, and the AIM system creates and deletes more than 1,000 "ghost trains"
each week -- both of which contributed to the loss-of-detection anomaly being difficult to
distinguish from routine noise.

TRAIN OPERATING MODES
Mode 1 (automatic): normal functions controlled by ATC, operator monitors. Train 112 was
operating in Mode 1. Mode 2, Level 1 (manual with speed protection): operator controls
acceleration/braking with ATP overspeed protection. Train 214 was operating in this mode, even
though WMATA required all revenue trains to operate in automatic mode (Mode 1) during rush
periods per Metrorail Safety Rules and Procedures Handbook (MSRPH) Rule 3.20. Mode 3
(manual with ATP cutout): no overspeed protection, used only when equipment malfunctions.

RECOMMENDATIONS
The NTSB made recommendations to the U.S. Department of Transportation, the Federal Transit
Administration, the Tri-State Oversight Committee, the WMATA Board of Directors, WMATA
itself, Alstom Signaling Inc., and six other transit systems using GRS track circuit modules:
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority, Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation
Authority, Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority, Metropolitan Atlanta Regional
Transportation Authority, Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority, and
Chicago Transit Authority.
